Monorails have found applications in airport transfers and medium capacity metros. To differentiate monorails from other transport modes, the Monorail Society defines a monorail as a "single rail serving as a track for passenger or freight vehicles. In most cases, rail is elevated, but monorails can also run at grade, below grade, or in subway tunnels. Vehicles either are suspended from or straddle a narrow guide way. Monorail vehicles are wider than the guideway that supports them."[4]

Similarities
Monorails are often elevated, sometimes leading to confusion with other elevated systems such as the Docklands Light Railway, Vancouver SkyTrain, the AirTrain JFK and cable propelled systems like the Cable Liner people mover which run on two rails.[citation needed]

Monorail vehicles often appear similar to light rail vehicles, and can be staffed or unstaffed. They can be individual rigid vehicles, articulated single units, or multiple units coupled into trains. Like other advanced rapid transit systems, monorails can be driven by linear induction motors; like conventional railways, vehicle bodies can be connected to the beam via bogies, allowing curves to be negotiated.

Monorails are sometimes used in urban areas alongside conventional parallel railed metro systems. Mumbai Monorail serves alongside Mumbai Metro,[5][6] while monorail lines are integrated with conventional rail rapid transit lines in Bangkok's MRT network.[citation needed]

Differences
Unlike some trams and light rail systems, modern monorails are always separated from other traffic and pedestrians due to the geometry of the rail.[7] They are both guided and supported via interaction with the same single beam, in contrast to other guided systems like rubber-tyred metros, such as the Sapporo Municipal Subway; or guided buses or trams, such as Translohr. Monorails can also use pantographs.[8][9]

As with other grade-separated transit systems, monorails avoid red lights, intersection turns, and traffic jams.[10][11] Surface-level trains, buses, automobiles, and pedestrians can collide each one with the other, while vehicles on dedicated, grade-separated rights-of-way such as monorails can collide only with other vehicles on the same system, with much fewer opportunities for collision. As with other elevated transit systems, monorail passengers receive sunlight and views.[12] Monorails can be quieter than diesel buses and trains. They obtain electricity from the track structure, whereas other modes of transit may use either third rail or overhead power lines and poles.[citation needed] Compared to the elevated train systems of New York, Chicago, and elsewhere, a monorail beamway casts a narrow shadow.[13]

Conversely, monorails can be more expensive than light-rail systems that do not include tunnels.[11] In addition, monorails must either remain above ground or use larger tunnels than conventional rail systems, and they require complex track-switching equipment.

Maglev
Under the Monorail Society's beam-width criterion, some, but not all, maglev systems are considered monorails, such as the Transrapid and Linimo. Maglevs differ from other monorails in that they do not physically contact the beam while moving.